[WIP] Add NuminaMath blog post (#2208)
huggingface/blog: winning-aimo-progress-prize.md

- Most innovations in LLM inference require access to modern GPUs, so standard methods like Flash Attention 2 or torch.compile do not work on T4 GPUs. Similarly, modern data types like bfloat16 are not supported which prompted us to explore post-training quantization methods like AWQ and GPTQ.

Initially we used [Abdur Rafae](https://www.kaggle.com/abdurrafae)’s [public notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/abdurrafae/improved-code-interpretation) for our submissions, but found the high variance to be problematic. To handle this, we took a different approach based Tool Integrated Reasoning:

![sc-tir.png](AIMO%20Blog%20Post%209f9fb68afdb44b3c98e6c9b63cac7c1b/sc-tir.png)

1. For each problem, copy the input N times to define the initial batch of prompts to feed vLLM. This effectively defines the number of candidates one uses for majority voting.
2. Sample N diverse completions until a complete block of Python code is produced.
3. Execute each Python block and concatenate the output, including tracebacks if they appear.

> 4. Repeat M times to produce a batch of generations of size N and depth M, allowing the model to self-correct code errors using the traceback. If a sample fails to produce sensible outputs (e.g. incomplete code blocks) prune that result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Repeat M times to produce a batch of generations of size N and depth M, allowing the model to self-correct code errors using the traceback. If a sample fails to produce sensible outputs (e.g., incomplete code blocks), prune that result.
```

5. Postprocess the solution candidates and then apply majority voting to select the final answer

> For our winning submission, we generated N=48 candidates with a depth of M=4. Increasing either parameter did not improve performance and we took a conservative approach to stay within the time limit, In effect, this algorithm augments [Self Consistency with CoT](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601) (shown below) with Tool Integrated Reasoning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our winning submission, we generated N=48 candidates with a depth of M=4. Increasing either parameter did not improve performance, so we took a conservative approach to stay within the time limit. In effect, this algorithm augments [Self Consistency with CoT](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601) (shown below) with Tool-Integrated Reasoning.
```

![Screenshot 2024-07-09 at 15.03.17.png](AIMO%20Blog%20Post%209f9fb68afdb44b3c98e6c9b63cac7c1b/Screenshot_2024-07-09_at_15.03.17.png)

We found that our Self Consistency with Tool Integrated Reasoning (SC-TIR) algorithm produced more robust results with significantly less variance on both our internal evaluations and the public leaderboard.

One technical detail worth mentioning is that we found it helpful to quantize the models in 8-bit precision. This was for three reasons:

> - It is very slow to upload models to the Kaggle Hub and compressing the model made this step twice as fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is very slow to upload models to the Kaggle Hub, and compressing the model made this step twice as fast.
```

> - T4 GPUs do not support bfloat16 and casting to float16 led to a degradation in model performance. Casting to float32 was not possible as that exceeded the available GPU memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- T4 GPUs do not support bfloat16, and casting to float16 leads to a degradation in model performance. Casting to float32 was not possible as that exceeded the available GPU memory.
```

> - In addition, a 16-bit model consumes approximately 32GB VRAM just to load the weights. With 2xT4s, this would have required manipulating the KV cache to run fast and we found it beneficial to tradeoff model precision for speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In addition, a 16-bit model consumes approximately 32GB VRAM just to load the weights. With 2xT4s, this would have required manipulating the KV cache to run fast, and we found it beneficial to tradeoff model precision for speed.
```

> We quantized our models using [AutoGPTQ](https://github.com/AutoGPTQ/AutoGPTQ) along with the training datasets for calibration. In practice this led to a small drop in accuracy, but provided the best compromise to accommodate the constraints imposed by evaluation on the Kaggle platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We quantized our models using [AutoGPTQ](https://github.com/AutoGPTQ/AutoGPTQ) along with the training datasets for calibration. In practice, this led to a small drop in accuracy but provided the best compromise to accommodate the constraints imposed by evaluation on the Kaggle platform.
```

### Avoiding the curse of overfitting

Overfitting to the public leaderboard is a common risk in Kaggle competitions, and even more so when the test set is just 50 problems. In addition, the rules allowed at most two submissions per day, making a robust internal validation dataset crucial for pacing our development. As specified by the AIMO team, the test problems are of intermediate difficulty, between AMC12 and AIME levels, with integer outputs.

To guide model selection, we used four internal validation sets to gauge the performance of our models on math problems of varying difficulty. To avoid potential contamination in the base model, we selected problems from AMC12 (2022, 2023) and AIME (2022, 2023, 2024) to create two internal validation datasets:

> - **AMC (83 problems):** we picked all the problems from [AMC12](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/AMC_12_Problems_and_Solutions) 22, AMC12 23 and kept those that can be converted to integer outputs. This results in a dataset of 83 problems. . This validation set was designed to mimic the private test set on Kaggle and we found our models could solve about 60-65% of these problems. To measure the variance, we ran each evaluation with 5-10 different seeds and typically saw variations of around 1-3% with our SC-TIR algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **AMC (83 problems):** We picked all the problems from [AMC12](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/AMC_12_Problems_and_Solutions) 22, AMC12 23 and kept those that can be converted to integer outputs. This results in a dataset of 83 problems. This validation set was designed to mimic the private test set on Kaggle and we found our models could solve about 60-65% of these problems. To measure the variance, we ran each evaluation with 5-10 different seeds and typically saw variations of around 1-3% with our SC-TIR algorithm.
```

> - **AIME (90 problems):** we picked all the problems from [AIME 22](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2022_AIME_I), [AIME 23](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2023_AIME_I_Problems), and [AIME 24](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2024_AIME_I) to measure how well our models could perform on difficult problems, as well as to gauge the most common failure modes. As above, we ran each evaluation with 5-10 seeds to measure variation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **AIME (90 problems):** We picked all the problems from [AIME 22](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2022_AIME_I), [AIME 23](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2023_AIME_I_Problems), and [AIME 24](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2024_AIME_I) to measure how well our models could perform on difficult problems, as well as to gauge the most common failure modes. As above, we ran each evaluation with 5-10 seeds to measure variation.
```

Let’s dive in!

1. [Introducing Numina - an open AI4Maths initiative](#introducing-numina---an-open-ai4maths-initiative)
2. [The AI Math Olympiad (AIMO) prize](#the-ai-math-olympiad-aimo-prize)
3. [Our winning solution for the 1st progress prize](#our-winning-solution-for-the-1st-progress-prize)
4. [The training recipe](#the-training-recipe)
5. [Good data is all you need](#good-data-is-all-you-need)
6. [Taming the variance with Self-Consistency and Tool Integrated Reasoning (SC-TIR)](#taming-the-variance-with-self-consistency-and-tool-integrated-reasoning-sc-tir)
7. [Avoiding the curse of overfitting](#avoiding-the-curse-of-overfitting)
8. [Other ideas we tried](#other-ideas-we-tried)
9. [Numina’s future - looking for contributors and partners!](#numinas-future---looking-for-contributors-and-partners)
10. [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

## Introducing Numina - an open AI4Maths initiative

There is something very special about mathematics.

> Mathematics is a domain accessible to everyone, even to children long before they can read. Some of the greatest mathematicians of all time were actually self-taught, like [**Srinivasa Ramanujan**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Srinivasa_Ramanujan), who was born into a modest family in India in 1887.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mathematics is a domain accessible to everyone, even to children long before they can read. One of the greatest mathematicians of all time  [**Srinivasa Ramanujan**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Srinivasa_Ramanujan) was self-taught, being born into a modest family in India in 1887. While for others it varies from recreation to profession.
```

Reviewer 2: as far as i know, no great mathematician was/is self-taught... Ramujan being an exception of course...but that's the most unexceptional of his exceptions

- A novel decoding algorithm for tool-integrated reasoning (TIR) with code execution feedback to generate solution candidates during inference.
- A variety of internal validation sets that we used to guide model selection and avoid overfitting to the public leaderboard.

We used a mix of open-source libraries to train our models, notably [**TRL**](https://github.com/huggingface/trl), [**PyTorch**](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch), [**vLLM**](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm), and [**DeepSpeed**](https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed). On one node of 8 x H100 GPUs, our models took 10 hours to train.

## The training recipe

Our fine-tuning recipe was largely based on the [**MuMath-Code paper**](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.07551), which involves training the model in two stages:

![mumath.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/winning-aimo-progress-prize/mumath.png)

> Two-stage training method from the MuMath-Code paper

Reviewer 3: Nit - should this be italic/indented based on the formatting of line 97? Or is this meant to be a section heading or something?

Author: good catch! will indent - it was meant to be a caption :)

When it comes to the progress prize, we have built two datasets so to finetune our model.

- numina-dataset.

    This dataset consists of one million problems, each with solutions written in a Chain of Thought manner. The sources of the dataset range from Chinese high school math exercises to US and international mathematics olympiad competition problems. The data were primarily collected from online exam paper PDFs and mathematics discussion forums.

    The processing steps include:

    1. OCR from the original PDFs.

    2. Segmentation into problem-solution pairs.

    3. Translation into English.

    4. Realignment to produce a Chain of Thought reasoning format.

    5. Final answer formatting.

- numina-dataset-TIR.

    Tool-integrated reasoning (TIR) plays a crucial role in this competition. However, collecting and annotating such data is both costly and time-consuming. To address this, we selected approximately 60,000 problems from the Numina dataset, focusing on those with numerical outputs, most of which are integers.

>     We then utilized a pipeline leveraging GPT-4 to generate TORA-like reasoning paths, executing the code and producing results until the solution was complete. We filtered out solutions where the final answer did not match the reference and repeated this process three times to ensure accuracy and consistency. This iterative approach allowed us to generate high-quality TORA data efficiently.

Reviewer 3: nit: is it ToRA?

- **AIME (90 problems):** we picked all the problems from [AIME 22](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2022_AIME_I), [AIME 23](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2023_AIME_I_Problems), and [AIME 24](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/2024_AIME_I) to measure how well our models could perform on difficult problems, as well as to gauge the most common failure modes. As above, we ran each evaluation with 5-10 seeds to measure variation.

Due to the small size of the AMC/AIME validation sets, model performance on these datasets was susceptible to noise, similar to the public leaderboard. To better assess our model's performance, we also evaluated it using a subset of the MATH test set, which contains 5,000 problems. We retained only the problems with integer outputs, to simplify majority voting and mimic competition evaluation. This resulted in two additional validation sets:

- **MATH level 4 (754 problems)**
- **MATH level 5 (721 problems)**

> By using these four validation sets, we were able to pick the most promising models across different training stages and narrow down the choice of hyperparameters. We found that combining small, but representative validation sets with larger ones was useful in this particular competition where each submission is subject to some stochasticity from sampling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using these four validation sets, we were able to pick the most promising models across different training stages and narrow down the choice of hyperparameters. We found that combining small but representative validation sets with larger ones was useful in this particular competition, where each submission is subject to some stochasticity from sampling.
```

## Other ideas we tried

As mentioned above, we tried a few approaches that were ultimately discarded in favor of the MuMath-Code recipe:

- Training a pure CoT model and using majority voting for evaluation
- Training an MMOS model to solve problems with Python in a single step

> Another technique we tried was applying [Kahneman-Tversky Optimisation (KTO)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01306) to new completions sampled from the SFT model. Here the approach was similar to [OrcaMath](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14830), namely:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another technique we tried was applying [Kahneman-Tversky Optimisation (KTO)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01306) to new completions sampled from the SFT model. Here, the approach was similar to [OrcaMath](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14830), namely:
```

- Sample 4 completions per problem with the SFT model, using interleaved rationales and code execution. We used the SFT dataset from Stage 2 as the source of prompts.
- Extract the answer and compare it with the ground truth. If correct, label the sample as positive, else negative.

> - Apply KTO to the SFT model on this dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply KTO to the SFT model on this dataset.
```

We found this form of on-policy KTO produced a slightly better model than the SFT one (a few percentage points on our internal evaluations) and scored 27/50 on the public leaderboard.

> One nice feature of KTO is that you can track the implicit reward during training and this really helps with debugging a run - for example, here’s one of our successful training logs where one sees the chosen (i.e. correct solutions) rewards increase over training, while the rejected ones are suppressed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One nice feature of KTO is that you can track the implicit reward during training, and this really helps with debugging a run - for example, here’s one of our successful training logs where one sees the chosen (i.e., correct solutions) rewards increase over training, while the rejected ones are suppressed.
```

![kto.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/winning-aimo-progress-prize/kto.png)

Unfortunately, we ran out of time to apply this method to our final SFT model, so it is possible we may have been able to 1-2 more problems!

> We also experimented with applying our SFT recipe to larger models like InternLM-20B, CodeLama-33B, and Mixtral-8x7B, but found that (a) the DeepSeek 7B model is very hard to beat due their continued pretraining on math, and (b) inference is very slow on 2xT4 GPUs and we experienced a number of mysterious timeouts that we couldn’t trace the root cause of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also experimented with applying our SFT recipe to larger models like InternLM-20B, CodeLama-33B, and Mixtral-8x7B but found that (a) the DeepSeek 7B model is very hard to beat due to its continued pretraining on math, and (b) inference is very slow on 2xT4 GPUs, and we experienced a number of mysterious timeouts that we couldn’t trace the root cause of.
```

> We also experimented with applying our SFT recipe to larger models like InternLM-20B, CodeLama-33B, and Mixtral-8x7B, but found that (a) the DeepSeek 7B model is very hard to beat due their continued pretraining on math, and (b) inference is very slow on 2xT4 GPUs and we experienced a number of mysterious timeouts that we couldn’t trace the root cause of.

Reviewer: A very common follow up question will be: "do you plan to release larger models?". It might be good to have it somewhere

Another failed experiment includes trying to use reinforcement learning (specifically the Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm and [REINFORCE-leave-one-out (RLOO) algorithm](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14740)) with code execution feedback and shaped rewards for writing code and getting correct/incorrect solutions. We applied this to the DeepSeekMath 7B RL model. While we saw some promising reward curves, we did not see any significant gains in performance. Given that online methods like RLOO are bottlenecked by text generation and slow to iterate with, we abandoned reinforcement learning in favor of KTO.

![rloo.png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/winning-aimo-progress-prize/rloo.png)

On the inference side, we also experimented with:

- Using a static KV cache and torch compilation. We found we were able to speed up generation in native transformers code by 2-3x on a H100, but hit a variety of cryptic errors on the Kaggle T4s, mostly due to the lack of support for model sharding with torch compilation in accelerate.

> A variety of model merging techniques like DARE, TIES, and WARP. Here we used mergekit ([https://github.com/arcee-ai/mergekit](https://github.com/arcee-ai/mergekit)) to merge the SFT and KTO models, or the SFT models with the public DeepSeekMath ones. Overall we found these merges led to either significant regressions on our internal evaluations and we ran out of time to explore this more deeply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A variety of model merging techniques like DARE, TIES, and WARP. Here, we used mergekit ([https://github.com/arcee-ai/mergekit](https://github.com/arcee-ai/mergekit)) to merge the SFT and KTO models, or the SFT models with the public DeepSeekMath ones. Overall, we found these merges led to significant regressions in our internal evaluations, and we ran out of time to explore this more deeply.
```

> A variety of model merging techniques like DARE, TIES, and WARP. Here we used [**mergekit**](https://github.com/arcee-ai/mergekit) to merge the SFT and KTO models, or the SFT models with the public DeepSeekMath ones. Overall we found these merges led to either significant regressions on our internal evaluations and we ran out of time to explore this more deeply.

Reviewer 3: For completeness/consistency, maybe add links to the merging method acronyms to the papers just because they're otherwise undefined

## Numina’s future - looking for contributors and partners!

> Following the initial success of Numina at winning the AIMO 2024 progress prize, we now aim to pursue our mission of fostering the development of artificial and human intelligence in the field of mathematics. You can visit our website to know more about our projects and please always feel free to drop us a note at [**contact@projectnumina.ai](mailto:contact@projectnumina.ai).**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the initial success of Numina in winning the AIMO 2024 Progress Prize, we now aim to pursue our mission of fostering the development of artificial and human intelligence in the field of mathematics. You can visit our website to learn more about our projects, and please always feel free to drop us a note at [**contact@projectnumina.ai](mailto:contact@projectnumina.ai).**
```

> Numina, like mathematics, is meant to be open for talents and supporters from all around the world willing to bring mathematics further with AI!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Numina, like mathematics, is meant to be open to talents and supporters from all around the world who are willing to bring mathematics further with AI!
```

## Acknowledgements

> We thank Thomas Wolf and Leandro von Werra for enabling the Numina and Hugging Face collaboration. We also thank Hugo Larcher for his help with making the GPUs go brrrr on the Hugging Face cluster and Colin Raffel for his advice on model merging methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We thank Thomas Wolf and Leandro von Werra for enabling the Numina and Hugging Face collaboration. We also thank Hugo Larcher for helping make the GPUs go brrrr on the Hugging Face cluster and Colin Raffel for his advice on model merging methods.
```

> We also wanted to express our gratitude to [**Mistral.ai**](http://Mistral.aihttps://mistral.ai/fr/), [**General Catalyst**](https://www.generalcatalyst.com/) and [**Answer.ai**](http://Answer.ai) who supported the project from the beginning.

Reviewer: Broken link for mistral
